Update state network spec (#70)
ethereum/stateless-ethereum-specs: state-network.md

Nodes **must** support the `utp` Discovery v5 protocol to facilitate transmission of merkle proofs which will in most cases exceed the UDP packet size.

We use a custom distance function defined below.

We use the same routing table structure as the core protocol.  The routing table must use the custom distance function defined below.

We use the same PING/PONG/FINDNODES/NODES messaging rules as the core protocol.

### Content Keys and Content IDs

The network supports the following schemes for addressing different types of content.

All content keys are the concatenation of a 1-byte `content_type` and a serialized SSZ `Container` object.  The `content_type` indicate which type of content key the payload represents.  The SSZ `Container` sedes defines how the payload can be decoded.

We define a custom SSZ sedes alias `Nibbles` to mean `List[uint8, max_length=64]` where each individual value **must** be constrained to a valid "nibbles" value of `0 - 15`.

#### Account Trie Node (0x00)

An individual trie node from the main account trie.

> TODO: consult on best way to define trie paths
```

> 0x00 | Container(path: Nibbles, node_hash: bytes32, state_root: bytes32)

Reviewer: Perhaps clarify this better as such:

```suggestion
content-key := 0x00 | Container(path: Nibbles, node_hash: Bytes32, state_root: Bytes32)
```

content_id := sha256(path | node_hash)
path       := TODO

```

#### Contract Storage Trie Node

An individual trie node from a contract storage trie.

```

> 0x01 | Container(address: bytes20, path: Nibbles, node_hash: bytes32, state_root: bytes32)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
content-key := 0x01 | Container(address: Bytes20, path: Nibbles, node_hash: Bytes32, state_root: Bytes32)
```

content_id := sha256(address | path | node_hash)
path       := TODO
```

#### Account Trie Proof

A leaf node from the main account trie and accompanying merkle proof against a recent `Header.state_root`

```

> 0x02 | Container(address: bytes20, state_root: bytes32)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
content-key := 0x02 | Container(address: Bytes20, state_root: Bytes32)
```

content_id := keccak(address)
```

#### Contract Storage Trie Proof

A leaf node from a contract storage trie and accompanying merkle proof against the `Account.storage_root`.

```

> 0x03 | Container(address: bytes20, slot: uint256, state_root: bytes32)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
content-key := 0x03 | Container(address: Bytes20, slot: uint256, state_root: Bytes32)
```

content_id := (keccak(address) + keccak(slot)) % 2**256
```

#### Contract Bytecode

The bytecode for a specific contract as referenced by `Account.code_hash`

```

> 0x04 | Container(address: bytes20, code_hash: bytes32)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
content-key := 0x04 | Container(address: Bytes20, code_hash: Bytes32)
```

content_id := sha256(address | code_hash)
```

### Distance Function

The overlay DHT uses the following distance function for determining both:

* The distance between two DHT nodes in the network.
* The distance between a DHT node and a piece of content.

```python
MODULO = 2**256
MID = 2**255

> def distance(node_id: int, content_id: int) -> int:

Reviewer 2: Just a question, as in most client and discovery v5 implementations we interpret id-s as `Uint256` numbers wouldn't  
```
proc distance(node_id: UInt256, content_id: UInt256): UInt256 =
  let rawDiff = 
    if node_id > content_id:
      node_id - content_id
    else:
      content_id - node_id

  if rawDiff > MID:
    return u256(0) - rawDiff
  else:
    return rawDiff
```
be equivalent to this distance function ? It passes all test cases, and most probably it would be also better performing.

Author: If this is equivalent then yes, we can use this more simplified version.  I just pulled something from stack exchange when I came up with the first one to be quick.

> A response with an empty `payload` and empty `enrs` indicates that the node is not aware of any closer nodes, *nor* does the node have the requested content.

#### Offer (0x07)

Offer a set of content keys that this node has proofs available for.

```
message_id := 7
type       := request

> sedes      := List[byte_list, max_length=64]

Reviewer 2: In chain history for `Offer` we are using `Container(content-keys: List[Bytes, 32])`, not bare list. It would be good to make it consistent imo. ( I slightly prefer version with Container)

Reviewer: Indeed. There are other locations such as `Find Content (0x05)` where there is only 1 item yet it gets wrapped in a container. So either we get Container on everything, or not at all on single items, but not some mix. I prefer the first.

Author: :+1: I'll switch to container.  I like the consistency too

> sedes      := List[byte_list, max_length=64]

Reviewer: What is the idea behind the `max_length` change from 32 to 64?

I assume it would be up to the implementations to make sure that you limit adding keys to the `List` to not go over your preferred UDP packet size. But even with the smallest content keys (e.g. 53 bytes for https://github.com/ethereum/stateless-ethereum-specs/blob/piper/state-network-revised/state-network.md#account-trie-proof), you'd be going far over the typical MTU?

Of course being able to offer a higher amount of content is better for having longer lived uTP streams, I'm just not fully understanding how the current limits are supposed to work.

Author: Nothing compelling here.  Easy future proofing in the case where we end up with content keys that are short enough to fit more in.  You are correct hat implementations will still need to ensure that the payload size doesn't exceed the UDP packet size.

In practice, I think most of the time we'll be sending only a very small number of items over these payloads (often just one)

```

The payload of this message is a list of encoded `content_key` entries.

#### Accept (0x08)

Response message to Offer (0x07).

> Signals interest in receiving the offered data fro the corresponding Offer message.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Signals interest in receiving the offered data from the corresponding Offer message.
```

```
message_id := 8
type       := response

> sedes      := Container(connection_id: bytes4, content_keys: BitList[max_length=64]]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
sedes      := Container(connection_id: Bytes2, content_keys: BitList[max_length=64]]
```

`connection_id` in uTP is two bytes

```

* `connection_id`: ConnectionID to be used for a uTP stream
    * ConnectionID values should be randomly generated.
* `content_keys`: Signals which content keys are desired
    * A bit-list corresponding to the offered keys with the bits in the positions of the desired keys set to `1`.

Upon *sending* this message, the requesting node should *listen* for an incoming uTP stream with the generated `connection_id`.

> Upon *receiving* this message, the serving node should initiate a uTP stream.

Reviewer 2: I think there is some background about dropping `Store` - https://github.com/ethereum/trin/pull/84#issuecomment-905772594

> Upon *receiving* this message, the serving node should initiate a uTP stream.

Author: Yes, looking at the different payloads that need to be gossiped, the dominant majority of the data doesn't fit into a single packet so the STORE message would very rarely be a viable way to transmit data.  Removing it seemed to simplify the protocol in a nice way, especially since the message triplicate doesn't fit well within the request/response paradigm of discv5

> TODO: how does message framing across the stream work for individual messages.

## Gossip

The state network will use a multi stage mechanism to store new and updated state data.

### Overview

The state data is stored in the network in two formats.

- A: Trie nodes
    - Individual leaf and intermediate trie nodes.
    - Gossiped with a proof against a recent state root

>     - Stored without a proof not anchored to a specific state root

Author: No, the current plan is for nodes to 1) occasionally pick the least recently validated node they are storing (which includes the path data) and to walk the trie to see if the node is still valid and 2) to gossip the exclusion proof they build in this scanning to other nodes so that they can delete them without needing to do the walk.

             /   \                       /   \
           /       \                   /       \
         /           \               /           \
2:      0             1             0             1
       / \           / \           / \           / \
      /   \         /   \         /   \         /   \
3:   0     1       0     1       0     1       0     1
    / \   / \     / \   / \     / \   / \     / \   / \
4: 0   1 0   1   0   1 0   1   0   1 0   1   0   1 0   1
```

#### *"state root"*
    
The node labeled `X` in the diagram.

#### *"trie node"*

Any of the individual nodes in the trie.

#### *"intermediate node"*

Any of the nodes in the trie which are computed from other nodes in the trie.  The nodes in the diagram at levels 0, 1, 2, and 3 are all intermediate.

#### *"leaf node"*

Any node in the trie that represents a value stored in the trie.  The nodes in the diagram at level 4 are leaf nodes.

#### *"leaf proof"*

The merkle proof which contains a leaf node and the intermediate trie nodes necessary to compute the state root of the trie.

### Stages

The gossip mechanism is divided up into individual stages which are designed to

> ensure that each individual piece of data is properly disceminated to the DHT

Reviewer 3: nit: disseminated

nodes responsible for storing it, as well as spreading the responsibility as
evenly as possible across the DHT.

The stages are:

- Stage 1:
    - Bridge node generates a proof of all new and updated state data from the most recent block and initiates gossip of the individual trie nodes.
- Stage 2:

>     - DHT nodes receiving trie nodes perform *neighborhood gossip* to spread the data to nearby interested DHT nodes.

Reviewer 3: this is a small thing but it might be useful to add a "(defined below)" after neighborhood gossip

    +-------------------------+
    |                         |
    | Bridge node initializes |
    | trie node gossip        |
    |                         |
    +-------------------------+
            |
            v
    +---------------------------+
    | Stage 2: trie nodes       |
    +---------------------------+
    |                           |
    | A: neighborhood gossip of |
    |    trie node and proof    |
    |                           |
    | B: initialization of      |
    |    gossip for proof trie  |
    |    nodes.                 |
    |                           |
    | C: initialization of      |
    |    leaf proof gossip      |
    |                           |
    +---------------------------+
            |
            v
    +----------------------------+
    | Stage 3: leaf proofs       |
    +----------------------------+
    |                            |
    | neighborhood gossip of     |
    | leaf proofs                |
    |                            |
    +----------------------------+

```

In this context the term "neighborhood gossip" refers to a DHT node
re-distributed data that they were interested in to the DHT nodes nearby who

> are also interested.

Reviewer 3: nit: "a DHT node re-distributing data they are"

The phrase "initialization of XXX gossip" refers to finding the DHT nodes that
are responsible for XXX and offering the data to them.

#### Stage 1: Data Ingress

The first stage of gossip is performed by a bridge node. Each time a new block
is added to their view of the chain, a set of merkle proofs which are all
anchored to `Header.state_root` is generated which contains.

- Account trie Data:
    - All of the intermediate and leaf trie nodes from the account trie necessary to prove new and modified accounts.
    - All of the intermediate and leaf trie nodes from the account trie necessary for exclusion proofs for deleted accounts.
- Contract Storage trie data:

>     - All of the intermediate and leaf trie nodes from each contract storage trie necessary to prove new and modified storage slots.

Reviewer 4: We might need to do more thinking on the proofs of new storage data. A node doesn't know that it's responsible for storage data until it can prove that the storage data is part of an account. That means (at least temporarily) proving the account with the storage root. I believe that we've been assuming storage proof gossip does *not* gossip the account proof, but for a node that doesn't know it's responsible for the slot yet, that makes it impossible to immediately prove inclusion for its local storage.

When individual trie nodes are gossiped they will be transmitted as both the trie node itself, and the additional proof nodes necessary to prove the trie node against a recent state root.

The receiving DHT node will perform *neighborhood* gossip to nearby nodes from their routing table.

#### Stage 2B: Recursive Trie Node Gossip

When individual trie nodes are gossiped, the receiving node is responsible for initializing gossip for other trie nodes contained in the accompanying proof.

This diagram illustrates the proof for the trie node under the path `0011`.  

```
0:                           X
                            / \
                          /     \
                        /         \
                      /             \
                    /                 \
                  /                     \
                /                         \
1:             0                           1
             /   \
           /       \
         /           \
2:      0             1
       / \
      /   \
3:   0     1
          / \
4:       0  (1)

```

Note that it also includes the intermediate trie nodes under the paths:

- `000`
- `001`
- `00`
- `01`
- `0`
- `1`

> - `X`

Reviewer 4: I still find this way of talking about the proofs confusing. Let's talk about the bodies of the nodes and the hashes of the nodes. For example, only the hash of the node at `001` is required to prove inclusion. But the body of the node at `00` *includes* the hash of `001`. So we only really need the bodies of the trie nodes at `X`, `0`, `00`, `001`, and `0011`. All the rest of the data is redundant, AFAICT.

The gossip payload for the trie node at `0011` will contain these trie nodes as a proof.  Upon receipt of this trie node and proof, the receiving DHT node will extract the proof for the intermediate node under the path `001` which is the direct parent of the main trie node currently being gossiped.  This proof would be visualized as follows:

```
0:                           X
                            / \
                          /     \
                        /         \
                      /             \
                    /                 \
                  /                     \
                /                         \
1:             0                           1
             /   \
           /       \
         /           \
2:      0             1
       / \
      /   \
3:   0    (1)

4:

```

The DHT node would then *initialize* gossip for the trie node under the path `001`, using this new slimmed down proof to anchor to the same state root.  This process continues until it reaches the state root where it naturally terminates.  We refer to this as *recursive trie node* gossip.

#### Stage 2C: Initialization Of Leaf Proof Gossip

> When receiving an individual trie node which represents a "leaf" node in the trie, the combined leaf node and proof are equivalent to a *"leaf proof"*.  The DHT node receiving this data in the form of "trie node" data is responsible for *initializing gossip* for the same data as a *"leaf proof"*.

Reviewer 3: it's not clear her which kind of gossip the DHT nodes initiate

Reviewer 4: Maybe clarifying that these aren't stages of a state machine, too? But yes, I think this is propagating the Stage 3 data here.

#### Stage 3: Neighborhood *"Leaf Proof"* Gossip

When receiving a *"leaf proof"* over gossip, a DHT node will perform *"neighborhood gossip"* to nearby nodes from their routing table.

### Updating cold Leaf Proofs

Anytime the state root changes for either the main account trie or a contract storage trie, every leaf proof under that root will need to be updated.  The primary gossip mechanism will ensure that leaf data that was added, modified, or removed will receive and updated proof.  However, we need a mechanism for updating the leaf proofs for "cold" data that has not been changed.

> Each time a new block is added to the chain, the DHT nodes storing leaf proof data will need to perform a walk of the trie starting at the state root.  This walk of the trie will be directed towards the slice of the trie dictated by the set of leaves that the node is storing.  As the trie is walked it should be compared to the previous proof from the previous state root.  This walk concludes once the node has fully connected the leaf data from there previous proof to the new state root.

Reviewer 3: I'm not sure but I think I only understood this because I knew what you were going to say; I don't think it's obvious what "fully connected" means. Maybe something like: "This walk concludes once it reaches a part of the tree which has not changed under the new state root, meaning the node has all the information it needs to be able to prove the cold leaves are still valid under the new state root." I don't know, maybe another picture would be better, showing that it's just the top of the proof which needs to be updated.

Reviewer 4: An option:
```suggestion
Each time a new block is added to the chain, the DHT nodes storing leaf proof data will need to perform a walk of the trie starting at the state root.  This walk of the trie will be directed towards the slice of the trie dictated by the set of leaves that the node is storing.  As the trie is walked it should be compared to the previous proof from the previous state root.  This walk concludes once all of the in-range leaves can be proven with the new state root.
```

> TODO: reverse diffs and storing only the latest proof.

> TODO: gossiping proof updates to neighbors to reduce duplicate work.

> ### POKE: Actively disceminating data and replication of popular data

Reviewer 3: nit: disseminating

Reviewer 3: Also, this is a third kind of gossip? It might be useful to have a table of the different kinds of gossip with a short description of when they occur.
